What is a microarray?

In genetics, a microarray or DNA microarray, sometimes referred to as DNA
biochip, refers to microscopic DNA dots, attached to a surface, almost always
solid.

DNA microarrays are used, mainly by researchers, to evaluate the level of the
process by which information from a large numbers of genes is used in the
synthesis of a functional gene product.

Due to the fact that in an array the number of probes can reach the tens of
thousands, experimenting with a microarray can enable multiple genetic parallel
tests.

As a result, many research projects and investigations in the field of genetics
have been dramatically accelerated by the use of microarrays.
Usually, in a microarray, the probes are synthesized and then attached to a
solid surface by altering the properties of the surface phase,
with the purpose of reducing the degradation over time.
This is accomplished by employing a covalent bond to a chemical matrix usually
by way of epoxy-silane, polyacrylamide, lysine, amino-silane, or others.

The solid surface of the array is, most often, a silicon chip or a glass
surface. When a chip is used, they are colloquially known as an Affy chip.
The name Affy comes from Affymetrix, an USA based company founded by
Dr. Stephen Fodor in 1992, that manufactures DNA microarrays. Their
headquarters are in Santa Clara, California.

There are other microarray platforms, such as Illumina, that use microscopic
beads, instead of the large solid support.
Additionally, by using the direct synthesis of oligonucleotide probes on
solid surfaces, microarrays can be constructed.

The only difference between a DNA array and another array is that they
either measure DNA or use DNA as part of their detection system.

One of the uses of DNA microarrays is to measure variations in expression
levels, in order to find SNPs, meaning single nucleotide polymorphisms.

Microarrays are based on the fundamental idea of hybridization between two
DNA strands. They require the property of complementary nucleic acid sequences
in order to specifically pair one with another, through formation of hydrogen
bonds between nucleotides that are base pair complementary.

Many complementary base pairs in a nucleotide sequence translates to
tighter non-covalent bonding between the two strands.

After the cleaning of non-specific bonding sequences, only strands that are
strongly paired will remain hybridized. Target sequences that are labeled by
being made fluorescent, that also bind to a probe sequence and generate a signal,
that in turn depends on the conditions that existed during hybridization, are
washed after hybridization.

The entire strength of the signal, from a feature, is a function of the amount
of the target sample binding to the probes situated on that spot.
Biochips use relative quantitation where the strength of a spot is being
compared with the intensity of the same feature, but placed under a a condition
that is not the initial one, and the identity of the feature is known by
its location.
